README.md, before:

# React Context

## Learning Goals

- Understand the use cases for React Context and what problems it solves
- Use `createContext` and the `useContext` hook to work with Context

## Introduction

So far, we've learned that there is only one way to share data across multiple
components: some parent component is responsible for passing down that data to
any child components that need it via **props**. However, for large applications
where many components need access to the same data, this approach can be a
burden.

The React Context API, and the `useContext` hook, allows us to share "global"
data between components without passing that data via props. Libraries like
React Router and React Redux take advantage of Context under the hood, so let's
see how we can use it in our applications as well!

## The Prop Sharing Problem

In this lesson, we have the following components:

```txt
App
├── Header
│   ├── ThemeButton
│   └── DarkModeToggle
└── Profile
    └── Interests
```

These components all need access to some shared state, which is currently kept
in the App component. Here's a diagram of the state the components share:

```txt
App [theme]
├── Header [theme, user]
│   ├── ThemeButton [theme]
│   └── DarkModeToggle [theme]
└── Profile [user]
    └── Interests [theme]
```

As you can see, even in this small example, we have several components that need
access to the same data.

In addition, because of the requirement that we must pass down data from parent
to child components, we have a couple of components that take in some data via
props, only to pass it along to a child component. For example, looking at the
`Profile` component, we can see that it takes in a `theme` prop, even though it
doesn't use it directly — it only needs to take this prop in so that it
can pass it down to the `Interests` component:

```jsx
// takes theme as a prop
function Profile({ user, theme }) {
  if (!user) return <h2>Please Login To View Profile</h2>;
  return (
    <div>
      <h2>{user.name}'s Profile</h2>
      {/* passes theme down to Interests */}
      <Interests interests={user.interests} theme={theme} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

This is known as **prop-drilling**, and it can become a burden for deeply-nested
component hierarchies.

Let's see how to use React Context to solve this problem.

## Creating Context

In order to create our context data, we need to create two things:

- The actual context object
- A context provider component

Let's start by creating the context for our `user` data. To organize our context
code, make a new file called `/src/context/user.js`. Then, create our context:

```jsx
// src/context/user.js
import React from "react";

const UserContext = React.createContext();
```

After creating the context object, we need a special "provider" component that
will give access to the context data to its child components. Here's how we can set
up the context provider:

```jsx
// src/context/user.js
import React from "react";

// create the context
const UserContext = React.createContext();

// create a provider component
function UserProvider({ children }) {
  // the value prop of the provider will be our context data
  // this value will be available to child components of this provider
  return <UserContext.Provider value={null}>{children}</UserContext.Provider>;
}

export { UserContext, UserProvider };
```

With our context created, and our provider component all set up, let's see how
we can use this context data from other components.

## Using Context

In order to give our components access to the context data, we must first use
the provider component to wrap around any component that need access to the
context. Based on our component hierarchy, the `Header` and `Profile` components
both need access to the `user` data in our context:

```txt
App [theme]
├── Header [theme, user]
│   ├── ThemeButton [theme]
│   └── DarkModeToggle [theme]
└── Profile [user]
    └── Interests [theme]
```

So let's update the `App` component with the `UserProvider`:

```jsx
import React, { useState } from "react";
import Header from "./Header";
import Profile from "./Profile";
// import the provider
import { UserProvider } from "../context/user";

function App() {
  const [theme, setTheme] = useState("dark");
  return (
    <main className={theme}>
      {/* wrap components that need access to context data in the provider*/}
      <UserProvider>
        <Header theme={theme} setTheme={setTheme} />
        <Profile theme={theme} />
      </UserProvider>
    </main>
  );
}

export default App;
```

You'll notice we also removed the `user` prop from these components, since we'll
be accessing that data via context instead.

Next, in order to access the context data from our components, we can use the
`useContext` hook. This is another hook that's built into React, and it lets us
access the `value` of our context provider in any child component. Here's how it
looks:

```jsx
// import the useContext hook
import React, { useContext } from "react";
// import the UserContext we created
import { UserContext } from "../context/user";
import Interests from "./Interests";

function Profile({ theme }) {
  // call useContext with our UserContext
  const user = useContext(UserContext);

  // now, we can use the user object just like we would if it was passed as a prop!
  console.log(user);
  if (!user) return <h2>Please Login To View Profile</h2>;
  return (
    <div>
      <h2>{user.name}'s Profile</h2>
      <Interests interests={user.interests} theme={theme} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

You can test this out by updating the `value` prop in our `UserProvider` to
something different, and see that the `Profile` component has access to the
updated data:

```jsx
function UserProvider({ children }) {
  const currentUser = {
    name: "Duane",
    interests: ["Coding", "Biking", "Words ending in 'ing'"],
  };
  return (
    <UserContext.Provider value={currentUser}>{children}</UserContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

Let's hook up the `Header` component to our context as well:

```jsx
import React, { useContext } from "react";
import ThemedButton from "./ThemedButton";
import DarkModeToggle from "./DarkModeToggle";
import defaultUser from "../data";
import { UserContext } from "../context/user";

function Header({ theme, setTheme }) {
  const user = useContext(UserContext);

  function handleLogin() {
    if (user) {
      // setUser(null);
    } else {
      // setUser(defaultUser);
    }
  }

  return (
    <header>
      <h1>React Context</h1>
      <nav>
        <ThemedButton onClick={handleLogin} theme={theme}>
          {user ? "Logout" : "Login"}
        </ThemedButton>
        <DarkModeToggle theme={theme} setTheme={setTheme} />
      </nav>
    </header>
  );
}
```

One thing you'll notice is that our `Header` component also is meant to handle
logging in/logging out a user. In the first version of our app, that
functionality was available to use in the `App` component since we had a `user`
variable as **state**:

```jsx
function App() {
  const [theme, setTheme] = useState("dark");
  const [user, setUser] = useState(null);
  return (
    <main className={theme}>
      <Header theme={theme} setTheme={setTheme} user={user} setUser={setUser} />
      <Profile theme={theme} user={user} />
    </main>
  );
}
```

We can re-gain this functionality by setting up the **context** value to be
stateful instead!

```jsx
function UserProvider({ children }) {
  const [user, setUser] = useState(null);
  return (
    <UserContext.Provider value={{ user, setUser }}>
      {children}
    </UserContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

Since the `UserProvider` component is still just a React component, we can use
any hooks we'd like within this component. You could also use the `useEffect`
hook in the provider, if you'd like: for example, to have your provider
component fetch some data from an API when it loads; or to read some saved data
from `localStorage`.

In the code above, we're using `useState` to create a `user` state variable as
well as a setter function. In the `Provider`, we're now using an **object** with
`user` and `setUser` as the **value** for our context.

After this update, we can now use the `setUser` function in our `Header`
component:

```jsx
function Header({ theme, setTheme }) {
  const { user, setUser } = useContext(UserContext);
  function handleLogin() {
    if (user) {
      setUser(null);
    } else {
      setUser(defaultUser);
    }
  }
  // ...
}
```

We'll also need to update the `Profile` component since our context value has
changed:

```jsx
function Profile({ theme }) {
  const { user } = useContext(UserContext);
  // ...
}
```

## Exercise

Now that you've seen one approach to using React Context for our user data, try
to implement React Context to handle the `theme` data for the app as well!

Completed code for this exercise is in the `solution` branch.

## A Word of Caution

Once new developers encounter context, it's often tempting to reach for it as a
solution to all your React state needs, since it helps save the pain of "prop
drilling". However, React recommends using context sparingly:

> Context is primarily used when some data needs to be accessible by many
> components at different nesting levels. Apply it sparingly because it makes
> component reuse more difficult.
>
> If you only want to avoid passing some props through many levels, component composition is often a simpler solution than context.
> — [Before You Use Context](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html#before-you-use-context)

Keep this in mind when you're considering adding context to your application.
Think about whether or not the data that's being held in context is truly
_global_, and shared by many components.

This [video](https://youtu.be/3XaXKiXtNjw) by React Router creator Michael
Jackson shows an alternative to using context for the sake of saving from props
drilling, and demonstrates how to use _composition_ instead.

## Conclusion

React's Context system gives us a way to share global data across multiple
components without needing to pass that data via props. Context should be used
sparingly, but it is a helpful tool for simplifying our components and
minimizing the need for prop drilling.

## Resources

- [React Context](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html)
- [useContext](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#usecontext)
- [Using Composition Instead of Context](https://youtu.be/3XaXKiXtNjw)
- [Application State Management with React](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/application-state-management-with-react)

Commit message:

added clarifying edits - NEED HYPERLINK

README.md, after:

# React Context

## Learning Goals

- Understand the use cases for React Context and what problems it solves
- Use `createContext` and the `useContext` hook to work with Context

## Introduction

So far, we've learned that there is only one way to share data across multiple
components: some parent component is responsible for passing down that data to
any child components that need it via **props**. However, for large applications
where many components need access to the same data, this approach can be a
burden.

The React Context API, and the `useContext` hook, allows us to share "global"
data between components without passing that data via props. Libraries like
React Router and React Redux take advantage of Context under the hood, so let's
see how we can use it in our applications as well!

## The Prop Sharing Problem

In this lesson, we have the following components:

```txt
App
├── Header
│   ├── ThemeButton
│   └── DarkModeToggle
└── Profile
    └── Interests
```

These components all need access to some shared state, which is currently kept
in the App component. Here's a diagram of the state the components share:

```txt
App [theme]
├── Header [theme, user]
│   ├── ThemeButton [theme]
│   └── DarkModeToggle [theme]
└── Profile [user]
    └── Interests [theme]
```

As you can see, even in this small example, we have several components that need
access to the same data.

In addition, because of the requirement that we must pass down data from parent
to child components, we have a couple of components that take in some data via
props, only to pass it along to a child component. For example, looking at the
`Profile` component, we can see that it takes in a `theme` prop, even though it
doesn't use it directly — it only needs to take this prop in so that it
can pass it down to the `Interests` component:

```jsx
// takes theme as a prop
function Profile({ user, theme }) {
  if (!user) return <h2>Please Login To View Profile</h2>;
  return (
    <div>
      <h2>{user.name}'s Profile</h2>
      {/* passes theme down to Interests */}
      <Interests interests={user.interests} theme={theme} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

This is known as **prop-drilling**, and it can become a burden for deeply-nested
component hierarchies.

Let's see how to use React Context to solve this problem.

## Creating Context

In order to create our context data, we need to create two things:

- The actual context object
- A context provider component

Let's start by creating the context for our `user` data. To organize our context
code, make a new file called `/src/context/user.js`. Then, create our context:

```jsx
// src/context/user.js
import React from "react";

const UserContext = React.createContext();
```

After creating the context object, we need a special "provider" component that
will give access to the context data to its child components. Here's how we can set
up the context provider:

```jsx
// src/context/user.js
import React from "react";

// create the context
const UserContext = React.createContext();

// create a provider component
function UserProvider({ children }) {
  // the value prop of the provider will be our context data
  // this value will be available to child components of this provider
  return <UserContext.Provider value={null}>{children}</UserContext.Provider>;
}

export { UserContext, UserProvider };
```

With our context created, and our provider component all set up, let's see how
we can use this context data from other components.

Curious about what children is? Review our React Children Lesson for a refresher! **Need hyperlink to related lesson**.

## Using Context

In order to give our components access to the context data, we must first use
the provider component to wrap around any component that need access to the
context. Based on our component hierarchy, the `Header` and `Profile` components
both need access to the `user` data in our context:

```txt
App [theme]
├── Header [theme, user]
│   ├── ThemeButton [theme]
│   └── DarkModeToggle [theme]
└── Profile [user]
    └── Interests [theme]
```

So let's update the `App` component with the `UserProvider`:

```jsx
import React, { useState } from "react";
import Header from "./Header";
import Profile from "./Profile";
// import the provider
import { UserProvider } from "../context/user";

function App() {
  const [theme, setTheme] = useState("dark");
  return (
    <main className={theme}>
      {/* wrap components that need access to context data in the provider*/}
      <UserProvider>
        <Header theme={theme} setTheme={setTheme} />
        <Profile theme={theme} />
      </UserProvider>
    </main>
  );
}

export default App;
```

You'll notice we also removed the `user` prop from these components, since we'll
be accessing that data via context instead.

We've also included our `Header` and `Profile` components as children of our UserProvider.

Next, in order to access the context data from our components, we can use the
`useContext` hook. This is another hook that's built into React, and it lets us
access the `value` of our context provider in any child component. Here's how it
looks when used in our Profile component:

```jsx
// import the useContext hook
import React, { useContext } from "react";
// import the UserContext we created
import { UserContext } from "../context/user";
import Interests from "./Interests";

function Profile({ theme }) {
  // call useContext with our UserContext
  const user = useContext(UserContext);

  // now, we can use the user object just like we would if it was passed as a prop!
  console.log(user);
  if (!user) return <h2>Please Login To View Profile</h2>;
  return (
    <div>
      <h2>{user.name}'s Profile</h2>
      <Interests interests={user.interests} theme={theme} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

You can test this out by updating the `value` prop in our `UserProvider` to
something different, and see that the `Profile` component has access to the
updated data:

```jsx
function UserProvider({ children }) {
  const currentUser = {
    name: "Duane",
    interests: ["Coding", "Biking", "Words ending in 'ing'"],
  };
  return (
    <UserContext.Provider value={currentUser}>{children}</UserContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

Let's hook up the `Header` component to our context as well:

```jsx
import React, { useContext } from "react";
import ThemedButton from "./ThemedButton";
import DarkModeToggle from "./DarkModeToggle";
import defaultUser from "../data";
import { UserContext } from "../context/user";

function Header({ theme, setTheme }) {
  const user = useContext(UserContext);

  function handleLogin() {
    if (user) {
      // setUser(null);
    } else {
      // setUser(defaultUser);
    }
  }

  return (
    <header>
      <h1>React Context</h1>
      <nav>
        <ThemedButton onClick={handleLogin} theme={theme}>
          {user ? "Logout" : "Login"}
        </ThemedButton>
        <DarkModeToggle theme={theme} setTheme={setTheme} />
      </nav>
    </header>
  );
}
```

One thing you'll notice is that our `Header` component also is meant to handle
logging in/logging out a user. In the first version of our app, that
functionality was available to use in the `App` component since we had a `user`
variable as **state**:

```jsx
function App() {
  const [theme, setTheme] = useState("dark");
  const [user, setUser] = useState(null);
  return (
    <main className={theme}>
      <Header theme={theme} setTheme={setTheme} user={user} setUser={setUser} />
      <Profile theme={theme} user={user} />
    </main>
  );
}
```

We can re-gain this functionality by setting up the **context** value to be
stateful instead! (Remember to import `useState`!)

```jsx
function UserProvider({ children }) {
  const [user, setUser] = useState(null);
  return (
    <UserContext.Provider value={{ user, setUser }}>
      {children}
    </UserContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

Since the `UserProvider` component is still just a React component, we can use
any hooks we'd like within this component. You could also use the `useEffect`
hook in the provider, if you'd like: for example, to have your provider
component fetch some data from an API when it loads; or to read some saved data
from `localStorage`.

In the code above, we're using `useState` to create a `user` state variable as
well as a setter function. In the `Provider`, we're now using an **object** with
`user` and `setUser` as the **value** for our context.

After this update, we can now use the `setUser` function in our `Header`
component:

```jsx
function Header({ theme, setTheme }) {
  const { user, setUser } = useContext(UserContext);
  function handleLogin() {
    if (user) {
      setUser(null);
    } else {
      setUser(defaultUser);
    }
  }
  // ...
}
```

We'll also need to update the `Profile` component since our context value has
changed:

```jsx
function Profile({ theme }) {
  const { user } = useContext(UserContext);
  // ...
}
```

## Exercise

Now that you've seen one approach to using React Context for our user data, try
to implement React Context to handle the `theme` data for the app as well!

Completed code for this exercise is in the `solution` branch.

## A Word of Caution

Once new developers encounter context, it's often tempting to reach for it as a
solution to all your React state needs, since it helps save the pain of "prop
drilling". However, React recommends using context sparingly:

> Context is primarily used when some data needs to be accessible by many
> components at different nesting levels. Apply it sparingly because it makes
> component reuse more difficult.
>
> If you only want to avoid passing some props through many levels, component composition is often a simpler solution than context.
> — [Before You Use Context](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html#before-you-use-context)

Keep this in mind when you're considering adding context to your application.
Think about whether or not the data that's being held in context is truly
_global_, and shared by many components.

This [video](https://youtu.be/3XaXKiXtNjw) by React Router creator Michael
Jackson shows an alternative to using context for the sake of saving from props
drilling, and demonstrates how to use _composition_ instead.

## Conclusion

React's Context system gives us a way to share global data across multiple
components without needing to pass that data via props. Context should be used
sparingly, but it is a helpful tool for simplifying our components and
minimizing the need for prop drilling.

## Resources

- [React Context](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html)
- [useContext](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#usecontext)
- [Using Composition Instead of Context](https://youtu.be/3XaXKiXtNjw)
- [Application State Management with React](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/application-state-management-with-react)
